External Dependencies
=====================

This chapter is based on a `PR for pypi2nix`_.  Got there if you want
to learn about the intial implementation of external dependency
detection.

Goal
----

The goal is to have a system that helps the user to deal with external
dependencies. Currently the user has to know by heart (or trial and
error) that e.g. \ ``lxml`` needs ``libxml2`` and ``libxslt``. We want
to automate that for the user, at least for the most common packages.

The idea is to have a system that you pass your initial requirements and
as a result you get a list of the necessary external dependencies. This
will have synergy with implementing automatic setup requirement
detection.

Mechanism
---------

Every ``pypi2nix`` invocation has with it associated a set of
requirements. This is usually the set of requirements that the user has
for their project. To find out what kind of external dependencies are
necessary to build the requested packages we need to solve two problems:

1) Find out all the dependencies of the specified/requested packages
   from the user without building them.
2) For all of these dependencies find out if and what external
   dependencies are required without building all the packages.

We have to know all required external dependencies in advance since
restarting the whole build just because a dependency was detected us
unacceptable. For some users with slower or older hardware even one
single build might take more than 10 minutes for larger package sets. If
the build for restart several times it would render ``pypi2nix``
unusable to those users.

That means that we have to have a place where dependency information can
be collected and used by pypi2nix. The information about the
dependencies is basically a directed acyclic graph since this
implementation will not support circular dependencies (for now).

For collecting information about external dependencies we will rely on
users reporting such external dependencies for know. Developing a tool
to detect external dependencies from build output is out of scope of
this PR.

The dependency graph for python dependencies can be generated by
``pypi2nix`` automatically. This PR will include a mechanism to
generated dependency graphs in the right data format for ingestion by
``pypi2nix``.

Infrastructure
--------------

We need way to distribute a dependency tree to users. This will make the
detection mechanism much more useful since it frees users from
maintaining fresh set of dependencies. We want to implement a similar
mechanism as with
`pypi2nix-overrides <https://github.com/nix-community/pypi2nix-overrides>`__.
This means that we a have a semi-central git repository that contains
all the detected dependencies. Since git is content addressable we can
ensure reproducible builds. Our security model with that approach is
**Trust on First Use**.

Data format
-----------

In order to minimize necessary labor we have to automate the generation
of dependencies as much as possible. This means that we need to have
data format that allows seamless merging of generated and curated
dependency trees. Also we should use a data format that is easy to edit
by humans and machines alike. A suitable candidate would be the `yaml
format <https://yaml.org/>`__. This would allow us to provide `json
schemas <https://json-schema.org/>`__ for the data format to allow for
effective reuse of the data. A concern might be that the volume of the
data makes a compact data file to large to download. If in the future we
run into traffic or performance problems we might consider implementing
a web API. Already using `json schemas <https://json-schema.org/>`__
would make that transition easy as we could leverage OpenAPI 3.0 to make
the data format and the API accessible to many people.

.. _`PR for pypi2nix`: https://github.com/nix-community/pypi2nix/pull/426
